feat: image preprocessor (#10788)
sveltejs/kit: documentation/docs/30-advanced/60-images.md

You can mix and match both solutions in one project. For example, you may display images on your homepage with `@sveltejs/enhanced-img` and display user-submitted content with a dynamic approach.

## @sveltejs/enhanced-img

> **WARNING**: The `@sveltejs/enhanced-img` package is experimental. It uses pre-1.0 versioning and may introduce breaking changes with every minor version release.

`@sveltejs/enhanced-img` offers plug and play image processing that serves smaller file formats like `avif` or `webp`, automatically sets the intrinsic width and height of the image to avoid layout shift, creates images of multiple sizes for various devices, and strips EXIF data for privacy. It will work in any Vite-based project including, but not limited to, SvelteKit projects.

### Setup

Install:

```bash
npm install --save-dev @sveltejs/enhanced-img
```

Adjust `vite.config.js`:

```diff
import { sveltekit } from '@sveltejs/kit/vite';
+import { enhancedImages } from '@sveltejs/enhanced-img';
import { defineConfig } from 'vite';

export default defineConfig({
	plugins: [
+		enhancedImages(),
		sveltekit()
	]
});
```

### Basic usage

> Use in your `.svelte` components by using `enhanced:img` rather than `img` and referencing the image file with a [Vite asset import](https://vitejs.dev/guide/assets.html#static-asset-handling) path:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use in your `.svelte` components by using `<enhanced:img>` rather than `<img>` and referencing the image file with a [Vite asset import](https://vitejs.dev/guide/assets.html#static-asset-handling) path:
```

Author: I think the angle brackets are unnecessary and implied. Including them introduces a number of issues. E.g. you're adding a warning below about how it must be `<enhanced:img />`, but here's it's written as `<enhanced:img>`. And of course the required attributes like `src` and `alt` are not present here. I think it's cleaner just to leave them without the brackets

Author: Eh, maybe you're right though. MDN does it that way

```svelte
<enhanced:img src="./path/to/your/image.jpg" alt="An alt text" />
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> Note that unlike `<img>`, the closing `/` character is required.

```

Author: I'm not sure this is true? I tried removing the closing `/` in an example and it seemed to work fine

> At build time, your `img` tag will be replaced with a `picture` providing multiple image types and sizes. It's only possible to downscale images without losing quality, which means that you should provide the highest resolution image that you need — smaller versions will be generated for the various device types that may request an image. If you're not using the [`sizes` attribute](#sveltejs-enhanced-img-srcset-and-sizes) you should provide your image at 2x resolution for HiDPI displays (a.k.a. retina displays).

Reviewer: I think it's more correct to describe the `<enhanced:img>` as being converted to the `<img>` with some stuff around it, rather than the `<picture>` with some stuff inside it, since that's where all the attributes end up.

```suggestion
At build time, your `<enhanced:img>` tag will be replaced with an `<img>` inside a `<picture>` providing multiple image types and sizes. It's only possible to downscale images without losing quality, which means that you should provide the highest resolution image that you need — smaller versions will be generated for the various device types that may request an image. If you're not using the [`sizes` attribute](#sveltejs-enhanced-img-srcset-and-sizes) you should provide your image at 2x resolution for HiDPI displays (a.k.a. retina displays).
```

> Since the `enhanced:img` tag will be replaced with a `picture` tag, you should refer to it as such within your `style` tag. Generally we recommend styling the `img` child of the `picture` tag rather than the `picture` tag itself to make it easier to switch between various solutions such as a dynamic CDN-based solution should you ever need to do so.

Reviewer: If we add SVG support in future, there'll be no `<picture>` at all, so I think this could end up being a red herring. We should probably nudge people towards using a classname rather than targeting the element, it's cleaner and simpler all round

```suggestion
Since the `<enhanced:img>` element is converted to an `<img>`, you can style it with an `img {...}` CSS rule, but you may find it more natural to add a `class` name and target that.
```

### Dynamically choosing an image

> You can also manually import an image and then pass it to an `enhanced:img` tag. This is useful when you have a collection of static images and would like to dynamically choose one. You can create a collection of images manually [as we do on the homepage showcase](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/blob/master/sites/kit.svelte.dev/src/routes/home/Showcase.svelte). In this case you will need to update both the `import` statement and `img` tag as shown below to indicate you'd like process them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also manually import an image asset and pass it to an `<enhanced:img>`. This is useful when you have a collection of static images and would like to dynamically choose one or [iterate over them](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/blob/master/sites/kit.svelte.dev/src/routes/home/Showcase.svelte). In this case you will need to update both the `import` statement and `<img>` tag as shown below to indicate you'd like process them.
```

```svelte
<script>

> 	import { MyImage } from './path/to/your/image.jpg?enhancedImg';

Reviewer: What if this was just `enhanced` rather than `enhancedImg`? Feels much cleaner to me. My dislike of camelCase is magnified when the uppercased letter looks like the lowercase of a different letter (ENHANCEDLMG)

```suggestion
	import { MyImage } from './path/to/your/image.jpg?enhanced';
```

</script>

> <enhanced:img src={MyImage} alt="An alt text" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<enhanced:img src={MyImage} alt="Some alt text" />
```

```

> You can also use [Vite's `import.meta.glob`](https://vitejs.dev/guide/features.html#glob-import). Note that you will have to specify `enhancedImg` via a [custom query](https://vitejs.dev/guide/features.html#custom-queries):

Reviewer: if i have my druthers...

```suggestion
You can also use [Vite's `import.meta.glob`](https://vitejs.dev/guide/features.html#glob-import). Note that you will have to specify `enhanced` via a [custom query](https://vitejs.dev/guide/features.html#custom-queries):
```

```js
const pictures = import.meta.glob(
	'/path/to/assets/*.{avif,gif,heif,jpeg,jpg,png,tiff,webp}',
	{
		query: {

> 			enhancedImg: true

Reviewer: ditto

```suggestion
			enhanced: true
```

		}
	}
);
```

### Intrinsic Dimensions

> `width` and `height` are optional as they can be inferred from the source image and will be automatically added when the `<enhanced:img>` tag is preprocessed. These attributes are added because the browser can reserve the correct amount of space when it knows image dimensions which prevents layout shift. If you'd like to use a different `width` and `height` you can style the image with CSS. Because the preprocessor adds a `width` and `height` for you, if you'd like one of the dimensions to be automatically calculated then you will need to specify that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`width` and `height` are optional as they can be inferred from the source image and will be automatically added when the `<enhanced:img>` tag is preprocessed. With these attributes, the browser can reserve the correct amount of space, preventing [layout shift](https://web.dev/articles/cls). If you'd like to use a different `width` and `height` you can style the image with CSS. Because the preprocessor adds a `width` and `height` for you, if you'd like one of the dimensions to be automatically calculated then you will need to specify that:
```

```svelte
<style>
	.hero-image img {
		width: var(--size);
		height: auto;
	}
</style>
```

### `srcset` and `sizes`

You may be wondering how to create something that looks like:

```html
<img
  srcset="image-small.png 160w, image-medium.png 400w, image-large.png 600w"
  sizes="(min-width: 60rem) 80vw, (min-width: 40rem) 90vw, 100vw"

>   />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/>
```

```

In this example, it would be tedious to have to manually create three versions of your image. Instead, you can specify the widths as a query parameter and we'll generate the `srcset` for you.

```svelte
<enhanced:img
  src="./image.png?w=160,400,600"

>   sizes="(min-width: 60rem) 80vw, (min-width: 40rem) 90vw, 100vw"

Reviewer: where did we land on defaulting this to `100vw`?

Author: It's a good question. At the very least we should probably simplify this example or provide a simpler one alongside it.

I'll take some time next week to think about and test it

Author: I don't think we should default to `100vw` (provided some more detail on Discord), but I do agree this looked a bit gnarly, so updated this section with a more realistic example

>   />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/>
```

```

> If `sizes` is specified directly as a string on the `img` tag then the plugin will automatically generate different width images:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `sizes` is specified directly as a string on the `<enhanced:img>` tag then the plugin will automatically generate different width images:
```

- If `sizes` is not provided, then a HiDPI/Retina image and a standard resolution image will be generated. The image you provide should be 2x the resolution you wish to display so that the browser can display that image on devices with a high [device pixel ratio](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/devicePixelRatio).
- If `sizes` is provided, then a large `srcset` is generated. If some of the `sizes` have been specified as a percentage of the viewport width using the `vw` unit then the `srcset` will filter out any values which are too small to ever be requested by the browser.

> > Text expressions like `sizes={computedSizes}` or `sizes={['(min-width: 60rem) 80vw', '(min-width: 40rem) 90vw', '100vw'].join(', ')}` will not be evaluated for the purposes of automatic image generation and will be skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Dynamic expressions like `sizes={computedSizes}` will not be evaluated for the purposes of automatic image generation and will be skipped.
```

### Per-image transforms

By default, enhanced images will be transformed to more efficient formats. However, you may wish to apply other transforms such as a blur, quality, flatten, or rotate operation. You can run per-image transforms by appending a query string:

```svelte
<enhanced:img src="./path/to/your/image.jpg?blur=15" alt="An alt text" />
```

[See the imagetools repo for the full list of directives](https://github.com/JonasKruckenberg/imagetools/blob/main/docs/directives.md).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Loading images from a CDN

In some cases, the images may not be accessible at build time — they live inside a content management system or elsewhere.

Using a content delivery network (CDN) can allow you to optimize these images dynamically, and provides more flexibility with regards to sizes, but it may involve some setup overhead and usage costs. Depending on caching strategy, the browser may not be able to use a cached copy of the asset until a [304 response](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/304) is received from the CDN. Building HTML to target CDNs may result in slightly smaller and simpler HTML because they can serve the appropriate file format for an `<img>` tag based on the `User-Agent` header whereas build-time optimizations must produce `<picture>` tags with multiple sources. Finally, some CDNs may generate images lazily, which could have a negative performance impact for sites with low traffic and frequently changing images. We do not currently offer any tools for dynamic image transforms, but we may offer such utilities in the future.

You can mix and match all three solutions in one project. For example, you may display images on your homepage with `@sveltejs/enhanced-img` and display user-submitted content with a dynamic approach.

```

---
title: Images
---

> Images can have a big impact on your app's performance. For best results, you should optimize them:
> 
> - generate optimal formats like `.avif` and `.webp`
> - create different sizes for different screens
> - ensure that assets can be cached effectively
> 
> Doing this manually is tedious. There are a variety of techniques you can use, depending on your needs and preferences.

Author: ```suggestion
Images can have a big impact on your app's performance. For best results, you should optimize them by doing the following:

- generate optimal formats like `.avif` and `.webp`
- create different sizes for different screens
- ensure that assets can be cached effectively

Doing this manually is tedious. There are a variety of techniques you can use, depending on your needs and preferences.
```

`@sveltejs/enhanced-img` builds on top of Vite's built-in asset handling. It offers plug and play image processing that serves smaller file formats like `avif` or `webp`, automatically sets the intrinsic `width` and `height` of the image to avoid layout shift, creates images of multiple sizes for various devices, and strips EXIF data for privacy. It will work in any Vite-based project including, but not limited to, SvelteKit projects.

### Setup

Install:

```bash
npm install --save-dev @sveltejs/enhanced-img
```

Adjust `vite.config.js`:

```diff
import { sveltekit } from '@sveltejs/kit/vite';
+import { enhancedImages } from '@sveltejs/enhanced-img';
import { defineConfig } from 'vite';

export default defineConfig({
	plugins: [
+		enhancedImages(),
		sveltekit()
	]
});
```

### Basic usage

Use in your `.svelte` components by using `<enhanced:img>` rather than `<img>` and referencing the image file with a [Vite asset import](https://vitejs.dev/guide/assets.html#static-asset-handling) path:

```svelte
<enhanced:img src="./path/to/your/image.jpg" alt="An alt text" />
```

> At build time, your `enhanced:img` tag will be replaced with an `img` wrapped by a `picture` providing multiple image types and sizes. It's only possible to downscale images without losing quality, which means that you should provide the highest resolution image that you need — smaller versions will be generated for the various device types that may request an image. If you're not using the [`sizes` attribute](#sveltejs-enhanced-img-srcset-and-sizes) you should provide your image at 2x resolution for HiDPI displays (a.k.a. retina displays).
> 
> Since the `enhanced:img` element is converted to an `img` element, you can style it with an `img {...}` CSS rule, but you may find it more natural to add a `class` name and target that.

Author: ```suggestion
At build time, your `<enhanced:img>` tag will be replaced with an `<img>` wrapped by a `<picture>` providing multiple image types and sizes. It's only possible to downscale images without losing quality, which means that you should provide the highest resolution image that you need — smaller versions will be generated for the various device types that may request an image. If you're not using the [`sizes` attribute](#sveltejs-enhanced-img-srcset-and-sizes) you should provide your image at 2x resolution for HiDPI displays (a.k.a. retina displays).

Since the `<enhanced:img>` element is converted to an `<img>` element, you can style it with an `img {...}` CSS rule, but you may find it more natural to add a `class` name and target that.
```

### Dynamically choosing an image

> You can also manually import an image asset and pass it to an `enhanced:img`. This is useful when you have a collection of static images and would like to dynamically choose one or [iterate over them](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/blob/master/sites/kit.svelte.dev/src/routes/home/Showcase.svelte). In this case you will need to update both the `import` statement and `img` tag as shown below to indicate you'd like process them.

Author: ```suggestion
You can also manually import an image asset and pass it to an `<enhanced:img>`. This is useful when you have a collection of static images and would like to dynamically choose one or [iterate over them](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/blob/master/sites/kit.svelte.dev/src/routes/home/Showcase.svelte). In this case you will need to update both the `import` statement and `<img>` element as shown below to indicate you'd like process them.
```

- If `sizes` is provided, then a large `srcset` is generated. If some of the `sizes` have been specified as a percentage of the viewport width using the `vw` unit then the `srcset` will filter out any values which are too small to ever be requested by the browser.

> Dynamic expressions like `sizes={computedSizes}` will not be evaluated for the purposes of automatic image generation and will be skipped.

### Per-image transforms

By default, enhanced images will be transformed to more efficient formats. However, you may wish to apply other transforms such as a blur, quality, flatten, or rotate operation. You can run per-image transforms by appending a query string:

```svelte
<enhanced:img src="./path/to/your/image.jpg?blur=15" alt="An alt text" />
```

[See the imagetools repo for the full list of directives](https://github.com/JonasKruckenberg/imagetools/blob/main/docs/directives.md).

## Loading images dynamically from a CDN

> In some cases, the images may not be accessible at build time — they live inside a content management system or elsewhere.

Author: ```suggestion
In some cases, the images may not be accessible at build time — e.g. they may live inside a content management system or elsewhere.
```

## Best practices

- For each image type, use the appropriate solution from those discussed above. You can mix and match all three solutions in one project. For example, you may use Vite's built-in handling to provide images for `<meta>` tags, display images on your homepage with `@sveltejs/enhanced-img`, and display user-submitted content with a dynamic approach.

> - Always provide a good `alt` text

Author: ```suggestion
- Serve images via CDN for any approach you choose. CDNs reduce latency by distributing copies of static assets globally.
- Always provide a good `alt` text
```

- If `sizes` is provided, then a large `srcset` is generated. If some of the `sizes` have been specified as a percentage of the viewport width using the `vw` unit then the `srcset` will filter out any values which are too small to ever be requested by the browser.

> Dynamic expressions like `sizes={computedSizes}` will not be evaluated for the purposes of automatic image generation and will be skipped.

### Per-image transforms

By default, enhanced images will be transformed to more efficient formats. However, you may wish to apply other transforms such as a blur, quality, flatten, or rotate operation. You can run per-image transforms by appending a query string:

```svelte
<enhanced:img src="./path/to/your/image.jpg?blur=15" alt="An alt text" />
```

[See the imagetools repo for the full list of directives](https://github.com/JonasKruckenberg/imagetools/blob/main/docs/directives.md).

> ## Loading images from a CDN

Author: ```suggestion
## Loading images dynamically from a CDN
```

In some cases, the images may not be accessible at build time — they live inside a content management system or elsewhere.

Using a content delivery network (CDN) can allow you to optimize these images dynamically, and provides more flexibility with regards to sizes, but it may involve some setup overhead and usage costs. Depending on caching strategy, the browser may not be able to use a cached copy of the asset until a [304 response](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/304) is received from the CDN. Building HTML to target CDNs may result in slightly smaller and simpler HTML because they can serve the appropriate file format for an `<img>` tag based on the `User-Agent` header whereas build-time optimizations must produce `<picture>` tags with multiple sources. Finally, some CDNs may generate images lazily, which could have a negative performance impact for sites with low traffic and frequently changing images. We do not currently offer any tools for dynamic image transforms, but we may offer such utilities in the future.

> You can mix and match all three solutions in one project. For example, you may use Vite's built-in handling to provide images for `<meta>` tags, display images on your homepage with `@sveltejs/enhanced-img`, and display user-submitted content with a dynamic approach.
> 
> ## Best practices
> 

Author: ```suggestion
## Best practices

For each image type, use the appropriate solution from those discussed above. You can mix and match all three solutions in one project. For example, you may use Vite's built-in handling to provide images for `<meta>` tags, display images on your homepage with `@sveltejs/enhanced-img`, and display user-submitted content with a dynamic approach.

```

> For each image type, use the appropriate solution from those discussed above. You can mix and match all three solutions in one project. For example, you may use Vite's built-in handling to provide images for `<meta>` tags, display images on your homepage with `@sveltejs/enhanced-img`, and display user-submitted content with a dynamic approach.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
- For each image type, use the appropriate solution from those discussed above. You can mix and match all three solutions in one project. For example, you may use Vite's built-in handling to provide images for `<meta>` tags, display images on your homepage with `@sveltejs/enhanced-img`, and display user-submitted content with a dynamic approach.
```

> - Serve images via CDN for any approach you choose. CDNs reduce latency by distributing copies of static assets globally.

Author: ```suggestion
- Consider serving all images via CDN regardless of the image optimization type you use. CDNs reduce latency by distributing copies of static assets globally.
```
